- [Instructor] So we established
that the Java collections framework
provides data structures for the Java programming language.
Now let's talk more about what data structures do.
That way you'll know what to expect
when you start working with Java collections.
At their core, data structures are used
to store, organize, manage, and retrieve data.
Each data structure has its own unique features
that set it apart from the others.
But at a high level, these capabilities
are provided by a few common operations
that are found on every data structure.
First, there's operations that allow us to add values
into the structure for storage.
Some data structures will define the position
where a new element is stored.
For example, one data structure known as a queue
pushes elements into the front of its structure.
Other data structures, like a list,
let us choose the position where a new element is placed.
So we might specify that we want to add a new element
as the third item near the middle of its structure.
When new elements are added to a data structure,
they're stored according
to an internally defined organization strategy.
This strategy is typically optimized
for a particular operation,
like retrieving or inserting an element.
When working with a linear data structure,
its elements are organized to form a sequence.
Other data structures based on trees or hashing functions,
will use more complicated organizational strategies
to store their elements.
Once elements are placed inside the structure for storage,
we can use other operations to manage the elements
if we need to make changes to the structure.
For example, we might decide to remove an element.
Or we might need to replace an element in the structure.
Another common operation is to apply a sorting algorithm
that rearranges the data structure's elements.
We also need to be able to retrieve elements
that were stored in the data structure,
which can be achieved using several operations
that provide access to the elements.
Retrieving an element at a specific position
or with a key is known as random access.
It normally provides better performance
because it does not need to traverse
all the elements in the structure
to find the target element.
If we need to retrieve every element in the data structure,
we can use operations or control structures like loops
that iterate through each element.
Finally, many data structures expose operations
that allow us to search
for a particular element in the structure,
either to remove it, find its position,
or to check if it exists.
There's a bit more to it than that,
but that's a high level look
at some common operations found on data structures.
Next, we'll start diving into the Java collections framework
where you'll find a hierarchy of collection types
that support different mixtures of these capabilities.